Hello everyone and welcome to the lecture on while loops while loops will allow us to have programs
continuously run some block of code until a condition is met are made true.
Let's go ahead and jump to our studio and see how they work.
OK.
So here we are our studio.
And in case you're already familiar of while loops and just want to know how you can make them in our
studio or what the syntax for them in our studio is.
It's just a key word while an imprint sees you have your condition and then the curly brackets you have
your block occurred which will continue to execute as long as condition inside the while loop is true
.
Let's go ahead and break down and actually program these in our studio for those that are new to the
concept the while loops.
OK so to get started what we're going to do is start a variable called X and assign it the integers
0 then we're going to have a WHILE loop.
And we're going to have a condition inside this parentheses.
We're going to say why X is less than 10 curly bracket.
We're going to go ahead and print and we'll print two things we're going to print X is I'm going to
go ahead and add in the paste function here.
Paste zeros there's no separator.
And then pass in the current x value close parentheses there.
And then what I'm going to go ahead and do is add 1 to x.
So we should see we're running this X starts at zero.
We say well X less than 10.
We print X is and then the current value of x and then we're going to go ahead.
Add 1 to x.
So we should see this go all the way up to until X's 9.
Once x is equal to 10 this while condition will no longer be true.
And this loop should break.
Let's go ahead and run the source in if we expand the console so we can see the output a bit.
We get exactly what we expected.
X is 0 X's 1 etc. all the way until X is 9 and then at that point we were at X's 9 we said nine plus
1 is 10 x was then get assigned 10.
And since 10 is not less than 10 that's equal to it.
This wild condition is no longer true and the loop breaks and that's the very basic use case of a WHILE
loop.
Let's go ahead and add an if statement inside of this while loop so we can get a clearer picture of
this and how it's actually breaking out of the loop.
I'm going to say if x is equal to 10 clearly bracket print
x y but this is a string x is now equal to 10.
Break loop
that's minimize this counts a little bit and notice here how the curly brackets and the indentation
were automatically placed for me by our studio that's going to be really useful and I have to come back
and read this code.
Let me go ahead and run source here and notice if we get one final line it looks up it looks almost
the same as the previous one except on the turn right after the addition.
So we have Expo's 1 to 10 this if statement becomes true and we print X is now equal to 10.
Break the loop.
Now we've seen one way we can break out of the loop a while loop that is.
And that is by making sure this condition is no longer true.
We can also manually break out of a loop by placing a break key word statement which is just the word
break.
I'm going to show you a simple example of how you can do this and add another print statement here and
I'm going to go ahead and say Prince
let's say whew.
I printed two.
So if I run this source code what I should see is is 0 1 2 3 4 5 all the way until X equal to 10.
Great clue.
And it says whew.
I printed two.
So we have two print statements here.
And then finally the while loop is no longer functioning it's been broken.
I can get a key word break.
Notice how it gets highlighted by syntax in our studio.
And if I say break what's going to happen is if this break statement is ever reached then the loop will
break.
Meaning I didn't see the second print statement actually occur.
So if I run source now again let me go and clear the console but I'm going to run source.
Notice I get 0 1 2 3 and then all the way over here get X is now equal to 10.
Break loop but I don't see this.
Whew.
I printed two statement because we had the break statement right before it.
So at the break statement condition does is just breaks out of the loop it just terminates it.
So when we want to use a break statement.
Well let me show you a better example than just not printing something.
Matt you want to keep doing this while loop unless X happens to equal 5.
And then we wanted to break out of it.
We have two options for that.
We could either make a condition here that will break it.
This while loop if it ever equals 10 or I can get a nice IF statement.
So make it maybe a little more cleaner or a little more readable.
So I'll say if x is equal to 5 I'll say X is not equal to 5.
Break loop and I'll go ahead and break it there.
So what's going to happen here.
I expand this when just a little bit a little clear.
I start with x equal to 10 and then I say well X is less than 10.
Print what X currently is and then add 1 to X if X is ever equal to 5.
I'm going to print X is now equal to 5 and I'm going to go ahead and break that loop with that break
statement.
So let's go ahead and run this
and here it is we say x is 0 x is 1 2 3 4.
And now we've been able to terminate that while loop using that break statement no break even if it's
inside this if statement if statements are loops or just conditional checks.
What break is going to do it's going to break out of the outside loop which is this while loop here
.
So keep that in mind.
Again you can check the notes for this lecture to get a written example how you can use the break statement
for this sort of condition statement in order to break a loop or terminate a loop.
OK so what should have you know gotten out of this lecture.
Just as a quick review.
Do you use a while loop you're going to save while in print.
CJ you'll have some condition and then in curly brackets you have some block of code.
If you ever want to break out of that loop.
You can either just use a simple break statement by itself or you can have a conditional break by saying
if some certain condition and then break.
All right.
That's it for this lecture.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture